Welcome back.
I want to revisit a few terms that we've seen before and that we should be familiar with.
That is in JavaScript functions are first class citizens which means we can have high order functions
and we can also have closures.
Now let's start off with higher order functions and we view what they are higher order functions both
in mathematics as well as computer science.
Simply means it's a function that does one of two things.
It either takes one or more functions as arguments or returns a function as a result often called a
callback so we can write a fairly simple high order function such as const h o f and this higher order
function will be a function that returns another function.
This is a high order function because when I do h o f for a higher order function Oh and I don't need
a return here because with an error function if it's on the same line the return is implied.
You see that I get a function so it's a function that returns a function.
So if I call this again there you I get 5.
So that's a high order function.
Another function could be a function that returns us or receives as a parameter a function.
So here I can just call function 5 so that if I do h o f and in here give it a function like function
a is a function that lets say returns 5 or in our case I'll return x which is our parameter if we do
this and run 0 return make sure I spelled I right.
Let's try that again.
There you go.
We have 5.
This is a function the parameter of h o f takes a function so that's a higher order function as well
and the interesting thing about high order functions and the fact that functions are first class citizens
in JavaScript means we can do closures.
Right.
And we had a whole section on closures so you should be familiar with it by now.
Let's just review like object closures in JavaScript are a mechanism for containing some sort of state
and in JavaScript we create a closure whenever a function accesses a variable defined outside of the
immediate function scope that is the scope of the parent.
And it's fairly easy to create a closure rate.
We simply define a function inside another function and expose the inner function either by returning
it or passing it to another function so that we can use that variable.
Let's have a look at an example.
I can say variable or less to cost has a closure function and this closure function will have a variable
let's call it let count which for now will equals zero and it's going to return a another function that
will say increment and increment will simply increase the count or we can just do plus plus so that
when we run the closure function and I click Run I get the increment function and if I run this again
or if I assign into a variable and call it const increment function I can now call the increment function
whenever I want.
Let's see I get undefined because it's not returning anything for the from the actual increment.
So let's just return count to see why we get we get one if I call this again.
There you go.
We had to.
And then once again for good measure we get three now.
Even though the initial closure function was called and we're done with that because of closure this
increment function remembers the variable used by or declared in the outer scope so the variable used
by the inner function will be available to it even after the outer function has finished running and
you might notice two things.
If you have been following along with our functional programming concept one is that we're modifying
state outside of our function aren't we.
This increment function is touching state or data that belongs to another function.
The closure function and when it comes to functional programming it doesn't mean we can't use closures.
We can definitely still use closures and they're very powerful but we have to be careful that closures
only make a function impure.
If we modified the closed over variable if instead our increment is just a get counter for example that
returns the counter and lets say the country is at fifty five and we'll change the name of this to get
counter and I run this I get 55 we're using closures here and although we're not modifying the state
like we had before we still have access to data outside of ourselves.
But as long as we don't modify it and mutate the data we're still following the functional programming
paradigm something that is nice with this is that we just created private variables we are able to use
closures to create data privacy which is very very cool because now as a user I can't really modify
the count.
Maybe this is a super important don't or don't touch variable because we're using closures.
We're able to still have access to that variable but make sure that others don't modify it which is
a very very nifty tool and closures get used a lot in functional programming for this specific reason.
We just have to be careful not to modify the state so now that we've just gone over high order functions
and closures we can keep going with our functional programming terminology.
I'll see you in the next one.
Bye bye.